[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Few symbols convey
the mysteries of ancient
consciousness more potently
than the Great Sphinx of Giza.
Just south of the Great Pyramid
on the West Bank of the Nile
River, this mythical limestone
creature has the body of a lion
and the head of a human.
The Sphinx is the oldest known
monumental sculpture in Egypt.
According to
mainstream scholars,
it was built by
ancient Egyptians
during the reign of the Pharaoh
Khafre between the dates 2558
and 2532 BC.
But in 1992, author and
independent Egyptologist John
Anthony West claimed that
the Great Sphinx of Giza
was not carved in 2500 BC but
9,000 to 10,000 years earlier,
before Egypt was a desert, and
even before the dawn of man
as we know it.
While studying the works of
1920s Schwaller de Lubicz,
John Anthony West discovered
that conventional Egyptologists
had overlooked an
important detail.
The body of the Sphinx
bore distinct markings
of water erosion.
If it was water erosion,
then the entire history
of ancient man would
have to be rewritten.
The conversation was a
controversial subject
the Oxford geologist didn't
want to get involved with.
This did little to deter
John West from wanting
to solve the mystery.
If the Great Sphinx
of Egypt was built
thousands of years earlier
than was written in mainstream
history, could the water
erosion marks he'd examined
shed new light on the
creation of the human race?
Determined to find out,
John sought other scientists
willing to join his quest.
His search led him to Professor
Robert Schoch, a geologist
at Boston University.
>> I first went to see
the Sphinx in 1990.
And I noticed immediately
that there was a disconnect.
Because the weathering
and erosion that I saw on
the Sphinx was not
compatible with Sahara Desert
hyper-arid conditions.
What I was seeing,
I was convinced,
was precipitation weathering
and erosion from rainfall,
from water beating down on it.
Now, how do you
have that when it's
been Sahara Desert for
5,000 or more years?
So immediately, I
saw this anomaly.
And the logical
conclusion I had, again,
virtually immediately, was
that the Sphinx must go back
to a earlier climatic regime.
>> Can the water-erosion marks
that John West discovered stand
alone to prove the Sphinx was
constructed before 2500 BC?
In 2008, geoarcheologists
Manichev and Parkhomenko
argued that through their
research of the analyzation
of erosion on the Sphinx they
figured it actually was part
of a civilization much older.
>> Two Ukrainian geologists
believe that the Sphinx,
which is on the edge
of the plateau at Giza,
could be as much as
800,000 years old.
Why do they believe this?
What they propose is that,
originally, the Mediterranean
Sea extended all the way
to the plateau of Giza
and lapped up against
the Sphinx to create
the distinctive weathering
patterns that we see.
I think that they could be
right about the weathering.
But I think that we're
talking about the Sphinx
before it was actually carved
into what we see today.
There was a rocky
promontory or knoll
at that site which obviously was
later used to carve the Sphinx.
And that would have had
weathering patterns on it.
But almost certainly, that does
date back hundreds of thousands
of years and could well
have been weathered by water
at some point in the past.
But certainly, that was
not in the recent past.
>> As theories about how
old the Sphinx is continue,
Robert Schoch has found his
research keeps leading him back
in time.
Since he first traveled
to Giza in 1992,
professor Robert
Schoch's research
has taken his first dating
of the Sphinx even further.
His most recent geological
and seismic findings
have convinced him that
the Great Sphinx could
have been carved as far
back as 12,000 years ago
at the end of the last ice age.
>> We know, geologically,
and from studies of ancient
climatology, that
prior to about 3000,
what is now Sahara was much
more moist, much more temperate,
much more rainfall.
So I concluded that had to go
back at least to that earlier
period.
My initial estimate
was 5000 to 7000 BC.
This was very, very
radical at the time.
That Egyptologists
were livid about this.
They were saying all
kinds of nasty things
about me, calling me
a pseudo scientist.
Because, they said, this
was absolutely impossible.
Because there's no
civilization when
you go back to 5000 to 7000 BC
that can construct the Sphinx.
Since then, I've
continued my studies.
I've carried on with this.
I've actually re-analyzed
the seismic data.
And I'm convinced at
this point, for a number
of technical reasons, that
actually, the seismic data
suggests that we have to go back
to at least around 10,000 BC.
And this also fits much
better the climatic regime
and gives enough
time for the erosion
and weathering
that we're seeing.
>> When could the Sphinx have
been exposed to what turns out,
what needs to have been, about
1,000 years of very heavy
rainfall.
There was no rainfall
like that in Egypt
in the time of the
pharaohs either.
The Giza Plateau was as dry
4 and 1/2 thousand years ago
as it is today.
And yet, here is a structure
that has been heavily weathered
by rainfall, which has fallen
on it for a long period of time.
You have to go back,
you know, more than 11
and 1/2 thousand years.
You have to go back
to 12,000 years,
really, to get the kind
of climate conditions
in that part of the
Sahara that would
have been capable of causing
that level of erosion
on the Sphinx.
The rainfall erosion is
most visible on the trench
that surrounds the Sphinx.
Nobody bothered to restore that.
And there, you can see
this undulating profile,
and cuts through it.
It's classic
rainfall-induced weathering.
The Sphinx's body has been
repaired again and again down.
It wasn't just in the Old
Kingdom it was repaired.
There were more repairs done
in the New Kingdom, as well,
and, you know, right down
into more recent times.
They're still restoring the
core body of the Sphinx today.
This, alone, should have alerted
archaeologists to the fact
that there is a problem.
Because some of the most
extensive restorations
of the Sphinx, when blocks were
applied to that rock-hewn core
body of the Sphinx to
repair damage, some of those
dates from the Old Kingdom
they date from 2500 BC.
Now, if you made your Sphinx
in 2500 BC, what on Earth
are you doing restoring
it massively in 2000?
It should be pristine?
>> Gregg Braden adds
another layer to the dating
of the Sphinx.
>> When we look at the mystery
of the Sphinx and the Giza
Plateau and the traditional
dating of only 4,000 years,
where that no longer makes sense
is the erosion on the Sphinx
has now been proven by Robert
Schoch to be fluvial erosion
rather than aeolian erosion.
And fluvial means vast amounts
of water moving quickly
over long periods of time
where aeolian erosion but
would be wind
blowing and eroding
over long periods of time.
Robert Schoch showed
beyond any reasonable doubt
that it is water erosion
that has created the Sphinx.
His findings were accepted by
AAPG, the American Association
of Petroleum Geologists.
They looked at the evidence.
And they said, of course,
this makes perfect sense.
We have no problem with this.
The historians have
a huge problem.
Because the last time there were
vast amounts of water moving
quickly over long
periods of time
is when the ice melted
from the last ice age.
And that is now being dated,
in that part of Egypt,
between 7,000 And 9,000
years before present.
So I think the evidence
strongly supports
that the Sphinx was in place
when that water was melting.
What it doesn't
account for is the Ice
Age was there for 20,000 years.
Was the Sphinx built
before the ice happened
and subject to the erosion?
Or is was Sphinx built
while the ice was in place?
And we don't know the
answer to that yet.
>> Some researchers suggest
that the Sphinx could have been
built during the
precessional cycle,
even before the current one,
giving it the date of 36,000
BC.
>> John Anthony West's
view is that, actually,
it's not marking 12 and
1/2 thousand years ago.
It's marking the
precessional cycle
before that, the
previous Age of Leo,
which would be 25,920
years before that.
The age of Leo recurs
every 25,920 years.
So the astronomy
doesn't absolutely
commit us to the date of 12
and a half thousand years ago.
But what does, I think,
committed to the date of 12
and 1/2 thousand years
ago is the geology,
the way that the
Sphinx is measured,
and the fact that was a
very rainy period in Egypt.
If you wind back the
ancient skies to 10,500 BC,
you go over to
Giza, and you find
that two constellations are
modeled on the ground there.
One is the constellation of
Orion, the belt stars of Orion,
and the positioning of
the three Great Pyramids.
And the other is
the constellation
of Leo with the Great
Sphinx gazing due east.
And the strangest thing is
that you again get a lock,
not in 2500 BC when Giza is
supposed to have been created.
None of it works then.
You have to go back 12 and 1/2
thousand years to 10,500 BC
to get Leo locking perfectly
with the Sphinx at dawn
on the spring equinox.
It's the age of Leo.
It's as though the
lion-bodied Sphinx
is looking at its own celestial
counterpart in the sky.
And the constellation
of Orion due south
on the meridian,
exactly the pattern
of the three pyramids
on the ground.
And that only happens 12
and 1/2 thousand years ago.
>> Could the Sphinx and the
pyramids have been built
at the same time?
If so, could the ancient
civilization that built it
be marking a very important
time for our current human race?
>> Now, with modern
computer software,
we can look at the ancient
skies in any period we wish.
It's interesting when we switch
from geology to astronomy.
And we start looking at
the Sphinx and the pyramids
as astronomically-connected
monuments.
And we can't do otherwise.
Because the Sphinx,
as I mentioned,
is perfectly aligned
on due east, perfect.
That's the work of people
who are studying the sky.
>> The temple has to be a
mirror image of the cosmos.
In other words, you have to
represent what you're actually
looking at.
A great example, of
course, is the Sphinx.
Looks at its mirror image
on the horizon of the spring
equinox 10,500 BC.
Boom.
>> Robert Schoch challenges the
conventional explanation behind
the Sphinx being
constructed in 2500 BC.
>> It's been claimed that the
face of the Sphinx is the face
of the Pharaoh
Khafre or Chephren.
So that would date to 2500 BC.
But all of this is really
very circumstantial.
I think there's a very good
possibility that the Sphinx was
not a Sphinx originally
but it was a lion,
so a lion's body
with a lion's head,
that the human head is a
reconstruction or a re-carving.
Maybe the head's been
re-carved more than once.
But if you think about as a
lion, during the age of Leo,
at the end of the last ice
age, circa 10,000 or so BC,
you had the Sphinx face
seen its, essentially,
own image in the sky
on the vernal equinox.
And I think this was
something that may have
been incredibly significant.
>> What would be the purpose
of such a marker at the Giza
Plateau?
Is there an unseen power
that generations later
tried to capture.
>> The idea of a lion image
as an important sacred notion
in a solar-worshipping culture
is completely understandable.
First of all, the
constellation's in the heavens.
So we're looking
upward for inspiration.
And the image of a lion has a
very strong, courageous, noble
quality.
So to put the head of a
pharaoh on the body of a lion
is to acknowledge
that the pharaoh has
these great, powerful qualities.
This is carved out of bedrock.
Not only is the
leader's energy united
with the image of a lion, it
is also united with the Earth.
So we have powerful imagery
of integration going
on in the Great Sphinx of Giza.
>> Could there be a different
kind of power we haven't yet
been able to understand attached
with the Sphinx and the Giza
Plateau?
>> Well, it's bizarre.
I mean, these are
gigantic monuments
left totally uninscribed.
Not even the name of
the supposed pharaoh,
no architect's name, nothing.
It doesn't have hieroglyphs.
It doesn't have inscriptions.
But they do speak, once you
understand the language that
has been incorporated where the
designer, who used language,
used mathematics and astronomy.
>> If the Sphinx was a powerful
image built only to reflect its
magnificence from the surface
of the Earth to its celestial
home, why would
it be uninscribed?
Why would the creators
not explain its purpose?
That answer might
lie below its feet.
Robert Schoch described how
his investigations led him
to another
significant discovery.
>> Below the Sphinx,
I was looking
for subsurface-weathering
features,
mineral logical changes.
We also found a
number of anomalies.
One of the anomalies,
probably the most
important and significant,
is under the left paw
of the Sphinx.
And it is-- what we can
tell from the seismic,
I'm quite convinced that
it is a cavity, but not
a natural cavity, an
artificial cavity or chamber
under the left paw.
Our initial analysis indicates
that there is something in it.
So it's not an empty cavity.
>> John Anthony West
and Robert Schoch,
in the very brief period that
they had access to the Sphinx,
they ran side-scan sonar
survey all around it.
And what was discovered beneath
the left forepaw of the Sphinx,
down at a depth of about 30
or 40 feet into the bedrock
beneath the left
forepaw of the Sphinx,
is a very large, clearly
man-made chamber.
As soon as the
Egyptian authorities
discovered what they
were really doing,
they threw them off the site.
And they weren't allowed to
continue with their work.
Do, perhaps, the
Egyptian authorities,
or the Egyptian archaeologists,
and their colleagues
in Western archaeology's, do
they perhaps already know?
I mean, I'm not a big
conspiracy theorist.
But there have subsequently
been drilling and investigation
projects under the Sphinx
which have been passed off
as being to do with
clearing groundwater
from under the Sphinx.
But I wonder if that's what
they were really doing.
I don't think we're being told
the whole truth about what
is happening at Giza.
>> If that might be true, could
the Great Sphinx be guarding
human behavior recorded for
thousands or millions of years?
>> One thing I would
anticipate finding,
if there is something in those
chambers beneath the Sphinx,
is the records of those earlier
civilizations that existed
on this planet.
Plato, the Greek philosopher,
said that the Greek law maker
Solon once went to Egypt.
And he was speaking with one
of the Egyptian high priests.
And the Egyptian high priest
asked about the history
of the Greek people.
And Solon, in the beginning,
humans were created.
Then there was a big
flood, a big catastrophe.
And after that, they
were created again.
And the Egyptian
priest began laughing.
He was he explained to
Solon that, actually, there
have been many devastations in
the long history of the world.
And the Earth has been
repopulated again, and again,
and again over the course
of many millions of years.
And he said, you Greeks
just remember the last one.
But there have been
many before that.
And he said to Solon,
you've lost the records
of these earlier histories.
The Egyptian priest said,
we have those records
of those earlier histories.
>> These things that are still
there underground were so vast
that he was really perplexed.
And he asked the Egyptian priest
who was taking him around,
who built these things?
And their reply to
him was they were
built by the crocodile kings.
Now, that might be
a perfect definition
of what the Anunnaki were.
Because we do see a lot
of depictions of them
with reptilian features
and things like that.
>> It may be at one point,
whoever built that chamber,
and had, what I believe
might be the hall of records
of the Egyptian priesthood, then
chose to actually bury that up.
We might find writings
from the tablets ways
of using their
knowledge that they
knew we wouldn't
be able to get to
until a certain point
in our evolution
where we wouldn't be able to
get down to these chambers
and pull out what was there.
>> If there really is a
chamber guarding the secrets
of humanity, why haven't
we been allowed to have it?
Graham Cere explains
that the Sphinx
tests the soul before it can be
embodied in the great knowing.
>> The Sphinx, to me, represents
kind of the holder of esoteric
knowledge and the
mystery of existence.
It's sort of the watcher of
the gates to heaven and tests
the soul on their
merit before they're
able to re-enter the garden,
sort of like the Cherubim
who, with the flaming swords,
guard the entrance to Eden
to make sure that the soul
is pure enough to re-enter.
So that's one aspect
of the Sphinx.
To me, it also
kind of represents
the integration of angelic
natures with human natures.
>> If the Sphinx does mark the
gateway to secret knowledge
about our planet, left by an
ancient high civilization,
then could it be
that, by design,
it is intended to remain dormant
until modern civilization is
ready to see the
universe differently?
Graham Hancock suggests
this question is partially
answered by understanding the
symbolism in Egyptian artworks.
>> The ancient Egyptians
had a, I think,
a beautiful way of
looking at human life.
This was a forgiving culture.
They understood human frailty.
We are not perfect.
We do not enter life perfect.
We are going to make mistakes.
And the question is, do we
learn from those mistakes?
What do we do with the lessons
that duality has to teach us?
Do we integrate those lessons
into our life subsequently?
Or do we just ignore them
and carry on as before?
>> Now, these sites
are very controversial.
All of them are.
Because they force historians to
rethink the traditional story.
When we begin to look at a
cyclic model of civilization
rather than the linear model
that says civilization began
5,000 years ago,
it opens the door
to explanations to
many of the things that
look simply mysterious
to us and make
no sense at all, such as the
discovery of entire cities
under the surface of the ocean
that we find in multiple places
throughout the world.
>> If the great ancient
knowledge in the chamber below
the paw of the Sphinx
is inaccessible,
perhaps the same knowledge may
exist in a different location,
or even in a
different frequency.
Healer and author Sonia Grace
describes a mystical encounter
meeting the ancient solar deity
Sekhmet during a remote vision.
>> When I spirit traveled
to the Great Sphinx,
it was back in time.
My guides took me.
And we arrived around 15,000 BC.
We were met by Sekhmet herself.
She was standing there.
She's huge!
She's, like, 20 feet tall!
She's enormous!
And she invited us
inside and took us down,
going into the Earth, a long
tunnel, this deep tunnel,
passageway.
It went this way.
It went that way.
It went this way again.
And it opened out
into a huge room.
And she said, this was
the portal for my people.
She says, my people came here
long before the Egyptian gods.
She said, this Sphinx
was a carving of a lion.
It was not the dog Anubis.
It was a lion.
And she said it's
because we come
from the Leo constellation.
And it was created as
a sight for her people,
meaning X marks the
spot, this is the portal.
So this is where her
people would literally
transport to where they were
from in the Leo constellation.
>> If the Sphinx and the
Great Pyramid are just the tip
of the iceberg of our
understanding of humanity
on this planet, could their
existence be a reminder to dig
deeper?
But when, if ever,
will this knowledge
be available to all mankind?
>> For all its technology,
and all its progress,
and all the amazing
stuff we have,
we live in a very fractured,
very dangerous world right now,
where the whole of human
achievement could be put
at jeopardy by, for example,
a massive nuclear war.
We have the toys to do
that, to bring humanity
back to the stone age,
in a matter of days.
And it's possible
that we could do so,
that we don't really know why
we're here or what we're doing.
We have an illusion
about what it is.
And that illusion is
locked deep in the past.
That's where it began.
And we need to recover
the truth about ourselves.
>> Could the knowledge preserved
be by the Clan of Osiris?
Is there a link between
the Egyptian gods
and Enki's mission to
help mankind's advancement
towards a higher culture?
Could that specific knowledge
be below the Sphinx?
>> The Great Pyramid,
in particular,
contains a sort of
mathematical code.
We know for sure, for example,
that astronomy and mathematics
were used.
The question is why?
It's the sort of-- well,
it's the universal language.
If ever we are contacted or
we contact extraterrestrials
somewhere else in the cosmos,
the only way we can communicate
is through mathematics
and astronomy.
Astronomy, we're given a
location, a sort of GPS,
if you like.
And mathematics would be
the dialogue between us.
So this monument is
speaking ET, if you like.
It's actually speaking
in a universal language.
You have to come
to terms with that.
And we have to ask
the question, is it
something that developed
purely earthbound?
Or is it a contact?
The questions are
legitimate today.
>> Maybe once we tap into
a different dimension,
we will be able
to read the code.
Some believe there are locations
on the planet that open portals
to another dimension
of our current reality.
>> What we do know is in places
like the Cairo Museum in Egypt,
a number of artifacts have
been found from sites such
as Sakkara, for example,
that scientists simply cannot
explain.
>> Up next, could there have
been portals on Earth where
the code is revealed?